#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass classicthesis
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language american
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type numerical
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 2
\tocdepth 2
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The olfactory world of insects
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Olfaction — the sense of smell — is a key sensory modality in animals.
 Airborne chemicals can be transported through the air over long distances,
 and their detection can help insects navigate plumes of odors to their
 source, helping them find food and mates.
 For example, mosquitoes use thier sense of smell to detect a variety of
 volatiale molecules produced by humans and animals, especially carbon dioxide,
 to find hosts to feed on
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Takken:1999ez,Verhulst:2011ko,Qiu:2006ei"

\end_inset

.
 Male moths use specialised, equisitely sensitive neurons on their antenna
 to detect trace amounts of phereonome realeased by female moths up to 200
 m away and reach them in a few minutes 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Wall:1987hb,Kennedy:1974tx"

\end_inset

.
 Insects – either as pests or pollinators of crops – play a large role human
 welfare and olfaction plays a key role in their behavior.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The study of insect olfaction spans a number of broad questions spanning
 many discplines.
 What are the possible chemical signals that can be detected in the environment
 that insects inhabit? What are the molecules and cells that insects use
 to sense these signals? What are the challenges in signal detection and
 how do insects overcome them? 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Features of olfactory stimuli 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An odor stimulus consists of one or more voltalized chemicals (or odorants)
 that is typically of low molecular weight (< 300 Da 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Riffell:2016ce"

\end_inset

) transported from a source through the air to the olfactory organ.
 Since odor stimuli, unlike light or sound stimuli, consists of physical
 movement of molcules, the dominant feature of an odor stimulus is the the
 identity of the molecules percieved.
 The number of unique odorants is very large, and different molecules are
 produced by different sources, have different valence, are percieved by
 different insects.
 However, the fact that all these molucles have to be transported by the
 air and have to be detected by insects means that many olfactory stimuli
 share commonalities regardless of their chemical compositions.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
The Physics of the odor environment
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All olfactory stimuli begin by odorant molecules evaporating from some source.
 These voltalized molecules move with the air that surrounds them, and their
 temporal evolution and statistics depends therefore on the movement of
 the air that they are carried by.
 Two non-dimensional numbers, the Péclet number and the Reynolds number,
 are useful descriptors of moving airstreams and thus can determine the
 statistics of the odor signals within them.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Péclet number is defined as the ratio of the advective and diffusive
 transport rates of a species in a flow.
 These two rates are determined by the ambient motion of the air and molecular
 diffusion that occurs by Brownian motion.
 For most insects navigate airborne odor stimuli, these two processes occur
 at very different scales: diffusion is slow and local, and advection is
 fast and extensive.
 Thus, Péclet number are typically large and odorant motion is dominated
 by advection 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Riffell:2008hp"

\end_inset

.
 This means that the motion of the air cannot be neglected when considering
 odor signals, and that in many cases, fluctuations in odor signals are
 correlated with fluctuations in instantenous flows.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Reynolds number is the ratio of the intertial forces to viscous forces
 within a fluid.
 It can be used to predict the transition from laminar to turbulent flow,
 and since the temporal statistics of odor signals are expected to be very
 different in the two cases, the Reynolds number is an important determinant
 of the olfactory environment.
 Insects navigating to an odor source in large Reynolds nuymber environments
 will experience intermittent, filamentous odor stimuli, while insects navigatin
g low Reynolds environments will experience door signals that can resemble
 more smooth gradients 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Riffell:2008hp"

\end_inset

, which can occur during periods of still air.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Odor plumes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Odor plumes are columns of air that contain a higher concentration of odors
 created by evaporation of odors from small sources.
 Due to the large Péclet numbers of flows in ecologically relevant contexts,
 the chemical nature of the odor does not dominate the statistcs of plumes,
 and plume structure can be considered to be largely independent of its
 constitutens 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Murlis:1992kp"

\end_inset

.
 Insects can find the source of odor plumes, such as flowering plant, by
 flying up odor plumes.
 Odor plumes are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

patchy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 or intermittent at scales < 1 s, and > 1 mm, and are composed of narrow
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

whiffs
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of odor interspersed with periods of low odor called blanks 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Riffell:2008hp"

\end_inset

.
 These whiffs tend to occur in bursts called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

clumps
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, and the time between subsequent whiffs, and between subsewueny blanks
 is distributed according to a power law 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Celani:2014ea"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At a given location, odor plumes are intermittent, and characterized by
 the absence of a continuous signal at a given intensity.
 The intermittenacy of odor plumes is a direct sonsequence of the motion
 of the air carrying the odor.
 Turbulence can cause filaments in odor plumes to become thinner, increase
 intermittancy, and decrease the effective intensity of odor signals in
 filaments 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Riffell:2008hp"

\end_inset

.
 The Kolmogov length is a measure of the size of the smallest turbulent
 motions in a flow, and is a function of the wind speed and height above
 ground, and is typically 1 cm 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Murlis:1992kp"

\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The location of the odor source can also determine intermittencay and temporal
 structure of an odor plume.
 Agave palmeri, the largest Agave species in the United States, produces
 flowers on stalks that can be as high as 5 m tall, and thus experience
 large wind speeds; while flowers of the jimsonweed plant, Datura wrightii,
 are close to the ground and experience lower wind velocities 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Riffell:2008hp"

\end_inset

.
 The Reynolds and Péclet numbers are thus very different for odor plumes
 from these two flowers, posing different challenges to the insects that
 must find them using olfaction.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Wind speed, an important determinant of the temporal structure of odor plumes,
 can vary signficanlty over time.
 Most importantly, the daily rhythym of the sun can change wind speed and
 atmospheric turbulence dramatially from day to night, offering windows
 of opporunity to insects like hawkmoths that use periods of low turbulence
 following sunset to find sources of food 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Riffell:2008hp"

\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Olfactory behaviour
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Olfactroy behaviors benefit insects when they lead to a source of food or
 mates.
 However, search strategies vary across insects, based on the size of the
 insect, the quality, reliability and volume of the olfactory signal, the
 environment they search in, and the range of sensors available to them.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An optimal strategy for small insects (whose body size is smaller than the
 length scale fo the plume) has been suggested to be to fly crosswind; and
 for large insects to fly up and downwind; till contact is made with an
 odor plumes.
 (Carde, R.
 T.
 1981.
 Precopulatory sexual behavior of the adult gypsy moth.) Phermones produced
 by female moths are an unambiguous and loud signal for male moths, given
 specificty of the pheronomone to moths and the sensitivity of antennae
 of male moths that phermonone.
 Mosquitoes that sense carbon dioxide and use it to find hosts must do so
 despite ambient carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and carbon dioxide released
 from non-host sources.
 Search strategies in these two cases are likely different.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
sensory fusion 1 – olfaction and anemotaxis – because odors always carried
 by air – ngelect diffusion – flight and the problems it brings with it
 – flight is aresome because you can sample the odor plumes up in the air,
 and you can fly fast, but it brings its own probelms:–upwind flight harder
 than upwind walking: upwind walking only needs mechanosensation, but upwind
 flight needs integration of visual and mechanosensory cues so insects can
 estimate airpseed independent of self motion–heading upwind isn't enough:
 you can miss the odorant source (because the plume becomes narrow upstream)
 – casting Casting, a reiterative zigzag that may progressively widen but
 does not progress upwind, enhances the likelihood of directly recontacting
 the plume as the cast widens or provides a station-keeping maneuver until
 the plume shifts back to the insect's position (35).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
sensory fusion 2 – also vision.
 frey and dickinson – multisensory fusion: flies don't just chemotax, but
 need mechanosensory and visual feedback to navigate and orinet to olfactory
 cues (Duistermars, Frye 2010) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
do flies use mulitple sensors to guide behaviour? left-right information?
 (Gomez Marin) (Borst & Heisenberg 1982) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
vision? mechnoesensation? cf.
 pure chemotaxis in bacteria.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Anatomy of the olfactory system 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The fruit fly, 
\emph on
Drosophila melanogaster
\emph default
, has been the system of choice for many studies on insect olfaction.
 The focus on 
\emph on
Drosophila 
\emph default
stems from several reasons: (i) it is easy to grow and maintain in laboratories,
 with a short generation time; (ii) its genome has been sequenced, and a
 large variety of genetic tools are available for 
\emph on
Drosophila
\emph default
; (iii) its olfactory system is similar to other insects, and even to vertebrate
s in gross organisation, though numerically simpler.
 While the anatomy of Drosophila is described in the following section,
 many features are common to the olfactroy system of other insects.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The primary olfactory organs in Drosophila are the antennae and the maxillary
 palps.
 The antennae are not just olfactory organs but are also organs of audition
 and mechanosensation.
 The olfactroy functions of the antennae are localized to its third segment,
 which are covered in fine sensory hairs called sensilla.
 Sensilla are also present on the maxillary palp.
 Based on their morphology, sensilla can be divided into three types: basiconic
 (10 functional types), coeloconic (4 types) and trichoid (4 types).
 Based on identified ligans, basiconic sensilla largely respond to voltaile
 food odors; coeloconic sensilla largely redpong to amines, humidity and
 a few food odors; and trichoid sensilla respond to volatile compounds and
 pheromones from other flies, like cis-vaccenyl acetate.
 The antenna has all three types of sensilla, that exhibit some degree of
 grouping on the surface, while the maxilalry palp only has basiconic sensilla.
 The structural and functional organisation of sensilla into these groups
 is similar in other insects (de Bruyne and Baker 2008).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Each sensillum contains the dendrites of 2 (sometimes up to 4) different
 primary sensory neurons, called 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
acfp{ORN}
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 In Drosophila, there are ~1320 ORNs in each antenna (Hallem 2004) .
 The sensillum also contains a lymph that the dendrites of ORNs are surrounded
 by, and contains pores, grooves or other opening based on the type of sensilla
 through which odor moleculres enter the sensillum, diffuse through the
 lymph, and reach the neuron.
 ORNs appear to be generic, with little functional specisliastion between
 ORNs.
 What gives a ORN a particular response profile, and connectivity appears
 to be the specialised receptor that it expresses.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Receptors in ORNs can belong to one of three families: the 
\emph on
olfactory receptors 
\emph default
(Ors), of which there are around 60 types; the 
\emph on
gustatory receptors 
\emph default
(Grs), and the 
\emph on
inotropci receptors 
\emph default
(Irs).
 ORNs in basiconic sensilla mostly express one Or, together with the olfactoy
 co-receptor Orco that together make a ligand-gated ion channel.
 Some ORNs in basiconic sensilla express the Grs Gr21a and Gr63a, that are
 unusual among Grs in its expression on the antenna, and mediate responses
 to carbon dioxide.
 Most coeloconic sensilla express IRs.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
While ORNs that express the same OR can be housed in sensilla that may be
 distributed across the antenna, their output is pooled in a remarkable
 structure that organises the axon terminals of ORNs by the receptor their
 express called the glomerulus.
 All ORNs that express the same OR project to one out of ~60 glomeruli in
 the antennal lobe, where they make synaptic contact with second order neurons
 called Projection Neurons (PNs).
 Typically, a single glomerulus pools ORs a single type, though there are
 exceptions in some specialized glomeruli.
 For example, in male moths, ORs that detect different components of a pheromone
 are pooled together in a single glomerulus (Hansson Science 1992) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Comparison with other olfactory systems
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The olfactory system of Drosophila exhibits many simialrities with that
 of other insects, and even with the mammalian olfactory system.
 Both the mammalian and the insect olfactory system use several primary
 olfactory organs.: mammals' primary olfacttory organ is the olfactory epithelium
 in the nose, but also include the vomeronasal organ, the Gureneberg ganglion,
 and the septal organ of Masera.
 The insect olfactory system is distributed across the antennae and the
 maxillary palp.
 The overall cellular structure of the olfactory system is also similar,
 where primary sensory neurons (ORNs) express olfactory receptors, and ORNs
 that express the same OR project to the same glomerulus.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Insect olfactory sytems differ from mammalian olfactory systems in many
 ways.
 Primarily, they are much smaller, and numericall less complex.
 While Drosophila have only ~60 olfactory receptors, and mosquitoes ~80,
 humans have around ~350, and mice over 1000.
 The gross anatomy of the olfactroy system is very different between insects
 and mammals, that has important consequences on their function.
 In insects, ORNs are housed in sensilla on external organs, where they
 can directly sample volatile ligands the air without any intermediate step.
 In mammals, respiration and the housing of the ORNs within the nose means
 that mammals sniff in order to smell.
 While this has the advantage of giving a degree of control over the flow
 of olfactory stimuli over ORNs, it also means that mammalian ORNs are locked
 to the kinetics of respiration.
 Recent studies have begun to uncover the consequences of this coupling
 (cite Rinberg).
 their ORNs are exposed to the air – irectly exposed to all kinetics of
 odorants in free air (exceptions? moths and fanning – kevin daly – but
 other insects fly, and flap their wings very quickly– so doesn't affect
 this) insect ORNs unqieuly located (physically) to know about fast kinetics
 of odorants in the air (Rinberg papaer about fluid mechanisc corckroach)
 Intrionisc temporal kinetics affect response of orns (carlotta)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Gross overview on how odorants are encoded in the olfactroy system
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
combinatorial code – cite de Bruyne, Carlson papers 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
inhibition/excitation 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
How does an individual ORN responsd to odorants?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
diificulty in recording from ORNs – they're small (Vosshall 2000 review)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
first attempt to record from ORNs (direct access/patch clamp) Dubin 1997
 – low yield (blind approach), cna't see what you record from, or what neuron
 it is you record form 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
improvement (Cao et al – genetically label the neuron of interest) drawbacks:
 liquid phase, eird responses that we don't normally see, low yeild.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
so most people do extracellular recordings (de Bruyne and followers)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Odorant transduction 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
the first paper to patch clamp from Drosophila neurons (Dubin 1997)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Spike initiation 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Interactions between neurons in a sensillum 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
chcih-ying stuff
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
there is also a paper that specifically looked at this
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
The olfactory world of insects 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
what would they smell flying around? whiffs? intermittentent plumes.
 flight and the complication that poses.
 dense abckgrounds.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Intrinsic Temporal kinetics of odorants - the difference between olfaction
 in insects and mammals – mammals breate, and kinetics of olfaction are
 dominated by the respiratory cycle – insects are different –
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Representation of odorants in ORN responses
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Spontaneous and odor-evoked transduction 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Transduction kinetics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Adaptation 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
ORN Response phnemonology 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How do ORNs respond to odorants? Complex spatio temoral code - what each
 receptor detects – Some specific receptors (phermonones, Co2), some generalist
 - ORs detect fruits, IR detect pheromones, Grs detect tastnts - Dose-response
 of ORs -
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Odor representations downstream of ORNs
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
going down to PNs – what happens in PNs – glomeruli – then downstream, mushroom
 body – 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
A quantitiative understanding of ORN response and adaptation 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
what are the key questions: how do ORNs respond to individual pulses of
 odorant? to steps? to steps on background? what is adaptation? 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
